Text from page 1:
Sample Written History and Physical Examination

History and Physical Examination

Patient Name:
Date:

Rogers, Pamela
6/2/04

Referral Source: Emergency Department

Data Source: Patient
Chief Complaint & ID: Ms. Rogers is a 56 y/o WF
having chest pains for the last week.

History of Present Illness

This is the first admission for this 56 year old woman,

who states she was in her usual state of good health until
one week prior to admission. At that time she noticed the
abrupt onset (over a few seconds to a minute) of chest pain
which she describes as dull and aching in character. The
pain began in the left para-sternal area and radiated up to
her neck. The first episode of pain one week ago occurred
when she was working in her garden in the middle of the
day. She states she had been working for approximately 45
minutes and began to feel tired before the onset of the pain.
Her discomfort was accompanied by shortness of breath, but
no sweating, nausea, or vomiting. The pain lasted
approximately 5 to 10 minutes and resolved when she went
inside and rested in a cool area.

Since that initial pain one week ago she has had 2 additional

episodes of pain, similar in quality and location to the first

episode. Three days ago she had a 15 minute episode of

pain while walking her dog, which resolved with rest. This

evening she had an episode of pain awaken her from sleep,

lasting 30 minutes, which prompted her visit to the

Emergency Department. At no time has she attempted any

specific measures to relieve her pain, other than rest. She

describes no other associated symptoms during these

episodes of pain, including dizziness, or palpitations. She

becomes short of breath during these

episodes but describes no other exertional dyspnea,

orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. No change in the pain
with movement, no association with food, no GERD sx, no palpable pain.
She has never been told she has heart problems, never had any

chest pains before, does not have claudication. She was diagnosed with
HTN 3 years ago,

She does not smoke nor does she have diabetes.

She was diagnosed with hypertension 3 years ago and had a
TAH with BSO 6 years ago. She is not on hormone replacement
therapy. There is a family history of premature CAD.

She does not know her cholesterol level.

Past Medical History

Surgical —

1994: Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral
oophorectomy for uterine fibroids.

1998: Bunionectomy

Comments

Define the reason for the patient's visit as who has been
specifically as possible.

Convey the acute or chronic nature of the problem and
establish a chronology.

onset

character

location

radiation

circumstances; exacerbating factors

associated symptoms

duration
resolution; alleviating factors

Describe the natural history of her problem since its
onset

Change or new circumstances to the problem
New duration

Reason she come in for visit

What has patient tried for relief

Relevant positive and negative ROS for this complaint

Review of systems for the relevant organ system

Relevant risk factor/environmental conditions

This highly relevant, although it may seem like a
trivial detail at first


Text from page 2:
Medical History —

1998: Diagnosed with hypertension and began on
unknown medication. Stopped after 6 months
because of drowsiness.

1990: Diagnosed with peptic ulcer disease, which
resolved after three months on cimetidine. She
describes no history of cancer, lung disease
or previous heart disease.

Allergy: Penicillin; experienced rash and hives in 1985.

Social History —

Alcohol use: 1 or 2 beers each weekend; 1 glass of
wine once a week with dinner.

Tobacco use: None.

Medications: No prescription or illegal drug use.

Occasional OTC ibuprofen (Advil) for
headache (QOD).

Family History
Mother: 79, alive and well.
Father: 54, deceased, heart attack. No brothers

or sisters. There is a positive family history of
hypertension, but no diabetes, or cancer.

Review of Systems

HEENT:
No complaints of headache change in vision, nose or ear
problems, or sore throat.

Cadiovascular:
See HPI

Gastrointestinal:

No complaints of dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, or change in
stool pattern, consistency, or color. She complains of
epigastric pain, burning in quality, approximately twice a
month, which she notices primarily at night.

Genitourinary:
No complaints of dysuria, nocturia, polyuria, hematuria, or
vaginal bleeding.

Musculoskeletal:

She complains of lower back pain, aching in quality,
approximately once every week after working in her garden.
This pain is usually relieved with Tylenol. She complains of
no other arthralgias, muscle aches, or pains.

Neurological:
She complains of no weakness, numbness, or incoordination.

Always use generic names

Always list the type of reported reaction

Quantity

Include over-the-counter drugs

Comment specifically on the presence or absence of

diseases relevant to the chief complaint

Separate each ROS section for easy identification

OK to refer to HPI if adequately covered there

List positive and negative findings in brief, concise
phrases or sentences


Text from page 3:
Physical Examination
Vital Signs:

Blood Pressure 168/98, Pulse 90, Respirations 20,
Temperature 37 degrees.

General:
Ms. Rogers appears alert, oriented and cooperative.

Skin:
Normal in appearance, texture, and temperature

HEENT:
Scalp normal.

Pupils equally round, 4 mm, reactive to light and
accommodation, sclera and conjunctiva normal.
Fundoscopic examination reveals normal vessels without
hemorrhage.

Tympanic membranes and external auditory canals normal.
Nasal mucosa normal.

Oral pharynx is normal without erythema or exudate. Tongue
and gums are normal.

Neck:

Easily moveable without resistance, no abnormal adenopathy
in the cervical or supraclavicular areas. Trachea is midline
and thyroid gland is normal without masses. Carotid artery
upstroke is normal bilaterally without bruits. Jugular venous
pressure is measured as 8 cm with patient at 45 degrees.

Chest:

Lungs are clear to auscultation and percussion bilaterally
except for crackles heard in the lung bases bilaterally. PMI
is in the 5" inter-costal space at the mid clavicular line. A
grade 2/6 systolic decrescendo murmur is heard best at the
second right inter-costal space which radiates to the neck.
A third heard sound is heard at the apex. No fourth heart
sound or rub are heard. Cystic changes are noted in the
breasts bilaterally but no masses or nipple discharge is
Seen.

Abdomen:

The abdomen is symmetrical without distention; bowel
sounds are normal in quality and intensity in all areas; a
bruit is heard in the right paraumbilical area. No masses or
splenomegaly are noted; liver span is 8 cm by percussion.

Extremities:

No cyanosis, clubbing, or edema are noted. Peripheral
pulses in the femoral, popliteal, anterior tibial, dorsalis pedis,
brachial, and radial areas are normal.

Nodes:
No palpable nodes in the cervical, supraclavicular, axillary
or inguinal areas.

Genital/Rectal:
Normal rectal sphincter tone; no rectal masses or
tenderness. Stool is brown and guaiac negative. Pelvic

Always list vital signs. Check for orthostatic BP/P
changes if it is relevant to the patient's complaint

Description may give very important clues as to the
nature or severity of the patient's problem

Comment on all organ systems

List specific normal or pathological findings when
relevant to the patient's complaint

This patient needs a detailed cardiac examination

More precise than saying “no hepatomegaly”

Always include these exams, or comment specifically
why they were omitted


Text from page 4:
exmaination reveals normal external genitalia, and normal
vagina and cervix on speculum examination. Bimanual

examination reveals no palpable uterus, ovaries, or masses.

Neurological:

Cranial nerves II-XIl are normal. Motor and sensory
examination of the upper and lower extremities is normal.
Gait and cerebellar function are also normal. Reflexes are
normal and symmetrical bilaterally in both extremities.

Initial Problem List

Chest Pain

Dyspnea

History of HTN (4 years)
History of TAH/BSO.
History of peptic ulcer disease
Penicillin allergy

FH of early ASCVD
Epigastric pain

Low back pain
Hypertension

Systolic murmur

Cystic changes of breasts
Abdominal bruit

Revised Problem List

Chest pain

FH of early ASCVD

Early surgical menopause
Dyspnea

Recent onset HTN

Abdominal bruit

Systolic ejection murmur
Epigastric pain

History of peptic ulcer disease
Lumbosacral back pain

OTC non-steroidal analgesic use
Cystic changes of breasts
Penicillin allergy

Although you can omit this initial problem list from your
final written H&P, (and just list a final problem list
shown below), it is useful to make an initial list simply
to keep track of all problems uncovered in the interview
(#1-9 in this list) and exam (#10-13)

This list regroups related problems (or those you
suspect are related) into a more logical sequence


Text from page 5:
Assessment and Differential Diagnosis

1. Chest pain with features of angina pectoris

This patient's description of dull, aching, exertion
related substernal chest pain is suggestive of ischemic cardiac
origin. Her findings of a FH of early ASCVD, hypertension, and
early surgical menopause are pertinent risk factors for development
of coronary artery disease. Therefore, the combination of this
patient's presentation, and the multiple risk factors make angina
pectoris the most likely diagnosis. The pain symptoms appear to
be increasing, and the occurrence of pain at rest suggests this
fits the presentation of unstable angina, and hospitalization is
indicated.

Other processes may explain her chest pain, but
are less likely. Gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD) may
occur at night with recumbency, but usually is not associated with
exertion. The pain of GERD is usually burning, and the patient
describes no associated gastrointestinal symptoms such as
nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain which might suggest peptic
ulcer disease. The presence of dyspnea might suggest a
pulmonary component to this patient's disease process, but
the absence of fever, cough or abnormal pulmonary examination
findings make a pulmonary infection less likely, and the
association of the dyspnea with the chest pain supports the
theory that both symptoms may be from ischemic heart disease.

2. Dyspnea

Her dyspnea may correlate with findings on physical
exam of a third heart sound and pulmonary crackles,
suggesting left ventricular dysfunction. In that case, she may
be manifesting symptoms and findings of congestive heart
failure from myocardial ischemia.

3. Recent onset hypertension and abdominal bruit

This combination raises the possibility of a
secondary cause of hypertension, specifically ASCVD of the
renal artery leading to renovascular hypertension. The lack
of hypertensive retinopathy and left ventricular hypertrophy
on physical examination further support a recent onset of her
BP elevation.

4. Systolic murmur

The possibility of important valvular heart disease
is raised by the murmur, specifically, aortic stenosis. The
murmur radiates to the neck as an aortic valvular murmur
often does, but a normal carotid upstroke may mean this
murmur is not significant.

5. Epigastric discomfort, NSAID use with a history
of peptic ulcer disease.

6. Lumbo-sacral back pain

7. Fibrocystic breast disease

8. Penicillin allergy

In the assessment you take each of the patient's major
problems and draw conclusions, in this case that the chest
pain is more likely due to ischemic heart disease instead
of other possibilities. You tie in several of the other
problems as risk factors for ischemic heart disease, and
not merely as random unrelated problems. You should list
and extensive justification for your most likely diagnosis.
You should also explain why you are less suspicious of
alternative diagnoses, such as esophageal reflux disease,
pulmonary or musculoskeletal pain.

As in the previous problem, you should explain, in more
detail than is shown in this example, why you felt the dyspnea
is more likely to be from ischemic heart disease, and not
asthma, bronchitis, or other possibilities. Follow this pattern
for all subsequent problems.


Text from page 6:
Plan:

1. Carefully monitor the patient for any increased chest pain that
might be indicative of impending myocardial infarction by admitting
the patient to the telemetry floor.

2. Start platelet inhibitors, such as aspirin to decrease the risk of
myocardial infarction; start nitrates to decrease the risk of occlusion
and to treat her symptoms of pain. For prolonged pain un-
responsive to nitrates, she may need an analgesic such as
morphine. The nitrates will also help to lower her BP.

3. Patient should have her cholesterol monitored and when
discharged she should be started on an appropriate exercise and
weight loss program, including a low-fat diet. If her cholesterol

is elevated, she may need cholesterol-lowering medication such
as HMG Co-reductases.

4. Schedule a cardiac catheterization since non-invasive
tests have a high pretest probability for being positive and regard-
less of the result, negative or positive, she will need a cath

5. Begin diuretics for her dyspnea which is most likely secondary
to volume overload — this will treat her high BP as well. She should
have a ventriculogram with the cath that will assess cardiac size
and presence of wall motion abnormalities.

6. Appropriate lab work would include BUN/Creatinine
to assess kidney function, electrolytes and baseline EKG.

You should develop a diagnostic and therapeutic plan
for the patient. Your plan should incorporate acute and
long-term care of the patient’s most likely problem. You
should consider pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic
measures and be cognizant of the fact that you need to
treat the symptoms make the patient comfortable) as
much as treating the disease when possible. You are
expected to know the usual classes of medications used
to treat these illnesses.

 

 


